In this video I'll show you how to include
a button to your graphical user interface,
and how to associate an action with it.
We'll be using the example provided
by the application "Block 1".
This application presents two buttons.
When you click on the pink button,
a pop-up message is displayed
at the bottom of the screen.
And when you click on the blue button,
it disappears.
Let's start a new Android Studio project.
Let's call the application Block01,
click next,
I'll keep the Minimum SDK
to the API level 16
because it will allow our application
to run on more than
90% of the phones out there.
Click next.
Choose the empty activity, it's one of
the simplest skeleton you can get for
an activity.
And then click next.
The code for
the only activity of our application will
be in the file MainActivity.java.
And AndroidStudio can also
generate an XML file for
us in order to define
the graphical user interface.
This file will be activiy_main.xml.
Click Finish.
Android studio opens with two of
the files that it generated for us.
And in fact, these will be the only
files we'll be editing today.
The MainActivity.java file,
we'll come back to this one later,
and activity_main.xml.
So this is where we will define
the graphical user interface.
Let's make sure that here we
are using the API level 16.
Okay, so now let's get rid of this
default "Hello world" TextView and
instead drag a button here
to the upper left corner.
Now I can change some of
the properties of this button.
Like its width.
I want it to match the parent in
order to have a large button.
Next I need to change
the background color.
So if I want a nice blue, I can use
AED2FF, it should do the trick.
Yes.
If I keep scrolling down,
I'll find the ID of the button.
So remember this ID will allow you to refer
to this particular View later on.
I like to call my views by using the type
of the view, so "button", followed by
something related to the action or
the information associated with the view.
So, this button is blue and sometimes,
during the execution of the application,
and will disappear, so
let's call it "button_blueInvisible".
Okay, and you notice that
here in the component tree,
you can see that the ID of
the button was modified.
I keep scrolling down, and here I find
the text which is displayed on the button.
Let's change that as well
so the button reads
"The Invisible Man's To Do List".
[SOUND]
Okay.
Now we need a second button, almost
the same as this one, except it reads
something else and it's pink, and
we want it right below the first one.
So we can either do the same operations,
take a button here and drag it there, or
I can display the XML file,
hitting the "Text" tab here.
And I can just copy the existing button,
and paste this code underneath.
So of course,
Android Studio complains because now
I have two views with the same ID.
So let's change the second one so
instead of button_blueInvisible
it's button_pinkPanther.
Okay let's change also the text
displayed on the button.
It's not "The Invisible Man's To Do List",
it's "The Pink Panther's To Do List".
We need to change the color as well, so
I need a pink, #FG9BF3.
And you can see here the resulting color.
So it's fine.
Let's go back to the design view.
Oh, here I see that the second button
is placed on top of the first one.
That's not what we want.
So here, instead of aligning
the pink button with the parent,
with the top of the parent, instead I
will put it below the first button.
And see here how it's useful to have an ID
for the view, because I'm able to say,
I want to be below
the button_blueInvisible.
Let's go back to the design view.
Okay, looks fine.
Now let's try that on the emulator.
So I hit the AVD manager and
start my emulator.
Okay now that my emulator started
let's run the application on it and
click the run button here.
And wait for the app... oh yep,
I need to specify I want
the application to run on the emulator.
I don't want to be asked
this question anymore okay, so
now it takes a while before the application
is deployed on the emulator.
Okay, it looks exactly like we wanted it to!
But now of course nothing
happens when I click on
the buttons because we didn't
attach any action with them yet.
So now it's time to do that.
Let's go back to the Java code.
With the blue button selected, I'm
looking for the onClick property here.
And here I specify the name of
the method that I want to be called
when this button is clicked.
Let's call it "toDo".
And let's do the same for
the second button.
Or instead let me show you how
to do that in the XML file.
See that, the new line
which was generated is this one.
So I can just copy that and
paste it for the pink button.
So now, both buttons will call
the "toDo" method when clicked, and
we're now going to define this method
in the MainActivity.java file.
So this method should have
the following signature:
It's a public method which returns nothing,
and it takes one parameter of type View.
And this parameter, in fact,
indicates the view which was clicked,
view which triggered the call
to the toDo method.
So here we need to be able to distinguish
whether v is the blue button or
the pink button because we won't perform
the same action for each button.
So first I need to retrieve a reference to
each button in order to compare V
to the two references.
So let's create two buttons,
button_blue, and button_pink,
In the onCreate method I will use
the findViewById method to associate
the button_blue to the view that
we've defined in the XML file.
findViewById
I use the ID that we defined in
the XML file: button_blueInvisible.
The findViewById method
returns a View, a generic view, and
instead we want something
more specific, a Button.
So I just need to cast
the result to a Button and
I do the same for the second button,
button_pink, so that will be a Button,
and I get it by using its ID
which was button_pinkPanther.
Ok,
now that I have my two references,
I am able to compare v to
one of these references.
So if v.equals(button_blue),
then I'll do the invisibility stuff.
And now if v
equals the pink button.
then I'll do the pop-up thing.
Okay, now let me show you how
to turn a view invisible.
In fact it's really easy.
Each view proposes a method called
setVisibility,
and of course there
are two possible values:
It's either visible or invisible.
So when the blue button is clicked,
it'll call the toDo method, with
a reference to the blue button itself.
So this test will succeed, and
the visibility of the button
will be changed to invisible.
Now what about the pop up?
In Android, the pop-up are provided
by a class named "Toast".
And this class defines a static
method called "makeText".
So you need to provide
the context of this toast.
Then the second parameter is the text that
you want to be displayed in the pop up.
So in our case it's "to do...
To do.
To do."
And the third and last
parameter indicates the duration you
want the pop up to be
displayed on the screen.
So you've got two predefined values,
it's either a short
time for a short interval or a long one.
Let me put a short one.
Okay, now our toast is ready, but
it won't display on the screen
until I call the "show" method.
Okay, now our code is complete.
Let's try it again on the emulator.
Now if I click the pink button,
I've got my little pop up displaying
at the bottom of the screen for
a short period of time.
And if I click the blue button,
it disappears.
Now let me show you a different
solution to add an action to a button.